ACK less frequently when CE marks are received (#68)
quicwg/ack-frequency: draft-ietf-quic-ack-frequency.md

## Expediting Congestion Signals {#congestion}

> And endpoing SHOULD send an immediate acknowledgement when a packet marked

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD send an immediate acknowledgement when a packet marked
```

with the ECN Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint in the IP header is

> received after the previous packet was not marked CE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
received and the previous packet was not marked CE.
```

An endpoint SHOULD also send an immediate acknowledgement when at least
max(2, Ack-Eliciting Threshold) packets marked with the ECN Congestion

> Experienced (CE) codepoint in the IP header are received. Doing so reduces the

Reviewer: How about
> An endpoint SHOULD reduce its Ack-Eliciting Threshold to at most 2 when acknowledging a contiguous series of CE marked packets.

Reviewer 2: I think the original attempt to emulate Accurate ECN feedback in TCP might have been misguided. The AccECN machinery was necessary in TCP because TCP does _not_ have ACK frequency control. Here in QUIC we are adding ACK frequency control. So the only addition needed for ECN should indeed be to immediately trigger an ACK on a transition from non-CE to CE marking. Then, QUIC should just continue ACKing every Ack-Eliciting Threshold packets. No need for the max(2, ...). I think (I'm not working on QUIC, so I don't keep the whole of the QUIC design in my working memory).

That sorts out the lower bound on ACK frequency, but it leaves one problem at the upper bound (if I understand QUIC correctly). [RFC9000 §13.2.1.  Sending ACK Frames](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000#section-13.2.1) and [§13.2.4. Limiting Ranges by Tracking ACK Frames](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000#section-13.2.4) suggest that a host that is only sending non-ack-eliciting packets could occasionally include an ack-eliciting packet (e.g. a ping) to catch up on the feedback and allow the other end to clear out the state its been collecting.

An example where this could be a problem is when data transfer switches back and forth from one QUIC peer to the other. Imagine an asymmetric data transfer from A to B ends. If the network CE-marked many or all the ACKs on the reverse path (B-A), I believe A will not ACK any of the last round of ACKs it receives. Then if B becomes the sender of a volley of data, it will unknowingly send data into a path that was already congested just with ACKs.

With ECN, I'm not sure it's the best design to rely on the sender of the non-ack-eliciting packets (B in the example) to send an occasional ack-eliciting packet. If the receiver of the non-ack-eliciting packets (A) is seeing a large amount of ECN marks, it ought to be able to send occasional ACKs of non-ack-eliciting packets (to B), whether or not B asks for them.

In AccECN, we allowed TCP to ack a sequence of CE-marked ACKs, as long as the ACK frequency was no less than 1 per 3 CE-marked packets. Even with 100% CE-marking, this damps any potential ACK ping-pong but still ensures the other end receive feedback of congestion events.

Author: Thanks, I'll update this to make it so CE marked packets are treated like ack-eliciting packets from an ACK perspective, which I think solves the upper bound problem you're outlining?

peer's response time to congestion events, while also reducing the ACK rate

> compared to Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} when peers are using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compared to {{Section 13.2.1 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}} when peers are using
```

> compared to Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} when peers are using

Reviewer 3: This line is a bit confusing. I think we can separate out `reduces the peer's response time to congestion events` and `while also reducing the ACK rate as compared to`. Another clarification is needed about the fact that congestion controllers don't mark but respond to marks.
Suggestion:
```
Doing so reduces the peer's response time to congestion events especially when peers are using DCTCP {{?RFC8257}} or other congestion controllers that respond to immediate CE markings which are much more
 frequent than classic ECN {{?RFC3168}}.
 ```
 And then talk about
 ```
 This will also help in reducing the ACK rate on the reverse path as compared to Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}
 ```

Author: It doesn't actually reduce the response time compared to RFC9000, so I think the current text is more accurate?

Reviewer 3: I copied the `reduces response time` phrase from the current text.
I agree that it doesn't reduce peer's response time to congestion necessarily but makes the response based on the extent of congestion (number of CE marks) instead of its presence. (RFC 9000)

Author: The PR had already been updated to be more similar to your text, but I added 'extreme congestion', PTAL

## Expediting Congestion Signals {#congestion}

An endpoint SHOULD send an immediate acknowledgement when a packet marked
with the ECN Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint in the IP header is

> received and the previous packet was not marked CE.

Author: ```suggestion
received and the previously received packet was not marked CE.
```

> And endpount SHOULD also treat packets received with a CE mark as though

Author: ```suggestion
An endpount SHOULD also acknowledge packets received with a CE mark as though
```

they were ack-eliciting, even if they are not ack-eliciting.  This ensures

> feedback on CE is received in a timely manner when most packets being sent
> are not ack-eliciting.

Author: ```suggestion
feedback on CE is received in a timely manner when most packets are not ack-eliciting.
```

Doing this reduces the peer's response time to congestion events, while also
reducing the ACK rate compared to {{Section 13.2.1 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}} during
extreme congestion or when peers are using DCTCP {{?RFC8257}} or other

> congestion controllers that mark much more frequently than
> classic ECN {{?RFC3168}}.

Author: ```suggestion
congestion controllers that mark much more frequently than classic ECN {{?RFC3168}}.
```
